Once around, the Horsehead Nebula.
Perhaps one of my favorite astronomical
objects
and uh possibly because it's quite a
challenge to observe. It's a small dark
nebula, hiding on the left hand side of
the lower regions of Orion's belt, not
too far from the flame nebula and the
star Al-Nitak.
discovered by Willilamina Fleming in a
photographic plate of 1888 which she
took at a Harvard College Observatory
and as I say very tough to observe. We
try to observe this every year in
January at our public observing nights
at the University of Cambridge and in 25
years we've not managed to find it once
and we probably never will because the
race between cameras getting better and
light pollution getting worse is tipping
in favor of the light pollution.
So I say it's in Orion. This is a photo
I took over the garden fence of Orion
with a simple digital camera showing
Beetlejurs at the top there, the bright
stars, Al-Nitak, Al-Nam, and Mntaka of
Orion's belt in the center and the pink
region of Orion's
uh great nebula there lower down. But
we're looking just below the left hand
star of Orion's belt, Alnitac.
could zoom in a little bit further here
and see that just below it there's
another brightish star maybe with a
couple of companions and that is a
little star cluster and the star Sigma
Orioness
here's a picture I took with the 10-in
reflector um and an amateur camera uh
just a simple DSLR
imaging al-Nac at the top there somewhat
overexposed the flame nebula off to the
left and the Horsehead Nebula to the
right. And I was using a hydrogen alpha
filter to try to cut through some of the
uh background light pollution that there
is in and around my neighborhood, which
makes this a real challenge.
A rather better image here um showing
the Horsehead Nebula. Again, you have uh
Al-Nitak right in the center there, the
Flame Nebula just to its left, and the
Horsehead Nebula below it.
Part of a much wider complex, the Orion
Molecular Cloud. And we'll look at the
whole of the Orion Molecular Cloud in
another video, but this is dust. The
Horsehead Nebula is a concentration of
dust blocking out the light of stars and
gas behind
The lower part of it is casting a
shadow. And that shadow is caused by
light from the star that is illuminating
all that red material that you can see.
And really, it is the silhouetting of
this finger of curling dust and gas that
is creating the illusion of the shape of
the horse head.
The red is from hydrogen. It's the
hydrogen alpha line 656.28
nanometer radiation.
One of the Balma series of hydrogen
lines caused by electron transitions in
hydrogen giving us that red color and uh
then the dirty dusty material blocking
the starlight behind. The light you can
see in the image here is coming from
above out of shot towards the top of the
image hitting these denser clouds and
illuminating them. I think you can see
the striation pattern in there which
helps to indicate which direction the
light is coming from. And the star
responsible is Sigma Orionus shown at
the top of the image here. It's a
multi-star system. You can see it with
the naked eye. It's magnitude 3.8. Uh
somewhat overshadowed by the brightness
of al-nac that it's uh so close to in
the sky that it often gets overlooked.
But quite a nice little star in its own
right and part of a young open cluster.
When you look at it with binoculars, you
can see how just how many stars there
are in this grouping. And it's that
starlight that is lighting up the
Horsehead Nebula.
This is a Hubble Space Telescope image
of the head of the horse head. And you
can see within it these little pink red
dots. These are young stars and star
systems forming in the dense knots
inside the Horsehead Nebula. So, it's
acting as a stellar nursery. Here it is
in higher resolution. You can see just
how many of them there are. The more you
look, the more you find of these little
tiny red dots peeking out of the de
depths of this dark cloud. And the cloud
is being boiled away from the top by the
incoming ultraviolet light from Sigma
Orioness.
Now, the Hubble Space Telescope took
another photograph for its 23rd
birthday. It used the infrared imaging
capability to punch through that dirt
and reveal some of those stars, those
young proto stars in more detail and see
through the gas and dust and reveal even
more of them than we had previously
detected. Um, and now we have further
telescopes that are often targeting the
same. This is the latest image from the
Uklid telescope showing the horse head
here. Um, and I just love this picture
of the the horse head bursting out of
that cloud of material.
James Webb has got involved and I've got
all three of them here. The wide field
of Uklid which is combined visible and
infrared. Zooming in, you get the
infrared picture from Hubble. And then
zooming in just on the horse's mane
there, right at the top, we have the
infrared image from JWST.
And you can tell it's James Webb because
the star at the top there uh has that
characteristic uh six-fold, four-fold
symmetry to it uh which is uh down to
the optics within James Web.
an amazing object to look at if you have
a nice dark sky and some fantastic
photographs that people have generated
of this and it's so famous that it makes
it into sci-fi. In the Hitchhiker's
Guide to the Galaxy, the Horsehead
Nebula is the home to the fabled planet
Maggratha,
uh, which is the planet where Deep
Thought, the big computer, was supposed
to be based and, uh, the home of people
like Slatty Bartfast. It turns up in
Elite Dangerous, perhaps the one of the
best computer games ever, uh, created by
a friend of mine. So, uh, I've got a
soft spot for that. And you can actually
navigate to the Horsehead Nebula. And
it's also in the Sarah Jane adventures.
Children are sent to the nebula for
training by an AI. It's a very modern
plotline that one, isn't it? Anyway,
that's the Horsehead Nebula. So, I'll
leave you with this picture of it and
thanks very much for listening.